it is 11 minutes away from ate breakfast
on a Monday morning the train services
in our cities have been dubbed third
world by many passengers because it
seems there are always delays or
breakdowns
Wellington have been especially hard hit
in recent months so we sent reporter
Matt McCain on a mission to see whether
things have improved trains canceled
priests delayed stopping at stations not
going that all just others the train not
arriving in you're expecting it to be
here commuters voicing their frustration
over the reliability of rail services
that are fed up after a series of
mishaps on the Wellington lines you'll
remember some of them last month twelve
thousand passengers were stranded after
a bungling contractor put in an overhead
structure ahead of time then the
wadded-up a line was closed after a
derailment and only a week after that a
signal fault and a train breakdown led
to more than a hundred services being
cancelled and according to the
passengers we spoke to those are only
the major disruptions they say we don't
hear about the daily problems they face
so here's the deal one handycam two
train journeys at two different times of
the day we're wanting to find out a few
things like weather delays a common
place on Wellington trains and how the
passengers feel about round commuting so
I've just bought my ticket into
Wellington train station it is now 727
a.m. and I've been told that the next
train at Wellington comes in a minute
he's hoping it's on time sitting on the
train on the way to the Wellington
station and it's 7:30 to the train was a
few minutes late but I've been told
that's half of the course but so far no
major dramas this morning on my
Wellington train journey but when I
spoke to morning commuters a different
story all together then
turning up on time away for now paint
gets canceled on the way home my
finalists are too many delays go get
angry or that when you've got meetings
ago tool and stuff and you know
completely mess them and you're late
have to walk in look like a you know the
slacking sometimes that you picked in my
studies and then they try to get more
people and when they're busy and the
heaters haven't been working so what
about an evening commute now my train
was three minutes late leaving the
platform which isn't a major what was
actually more frustrating was for five
minute weights to even get my ticket and
then when I got to the front of the line
the woman couldn't even tell me which
platform my time with problem at peak
hour time like it is right now I can
assume that with a five minute wait
there would be a lot of people who would
necessarily train all together but again
angry passengers
Peter's not working in trains doors not
working carriages market broken windows
very frustrating I'd like to put my
daughter at school doesn't stop three
stations early for my station things
like that but I think more recently they
have personal problems and my
expectation now is that it won't be here
on time so although my journey was
relatively smooth I've been told that
the exception rather than the rule many
passengers telling me if things don't
get sorted soon they'll be looking at
other forms of transport so some pretty
grumpy commuters there what is Kiwi Kiwi
rails response for that were joined by
Ross Hayward general manager of
passenger services good morning Ross
this is just plain embarrassing
isn't it well it is that it's certainly
not the history of Metro and Wellington
we've normally have a very good record
of around about 92% on-time performance
that's fallen dramatically over the last
few months down around about eighty
three percent which is utterly
unacceptable tight timetable and that's
to meet demand seekers they demand is
risen and you're not able to meet it
basically we're not able to meet it we
have the same rolling stock we have 98
percent of our carriages and service at
any one time
sick thirdly the rolling stock is very
old
last time it had analog hasn't had naval
horn in 26 years and I guess the most
important is we have major projects
underway to upgrade the system and they
having a severe impact on our business
at the moment right so it's the upgrades
that's causing most of the delays is
that a fair proportion amiss
okay what about overcrowding poor
communication broken heaters
it's a shambles isn't it at the moment
well no it's not a shambles the heaters
are currently working between 95 and 100
percent of the time and we've had a
number of weeks at 100 we've largely
resolved that particular issue that
again as a function of the the old
rolling stock and it's equipment that
needs to be refurbished that needs to be
refurbished now and that's what we're
waiting for you does it need to be
refurbished rush Russel replaced tell us
what you don't leave refurbish them I
know I believe refurbishment will fix it
it's about a third of the cost of
replacement it's the most effective way
to go and and when are we going to see
the entire system improve I would say
around about two years now the problem
of that is we haven't got a short-term
problem we've got a long-term problem we
have to deal with so we don't have the
option of sitting back and doing nothing
we have to look at improving
communications and with embarked on it
already with improved on train
communications
electronic displays a revised sound
system and Wellington is being developed
and a new websites coming online and
September and hopefully with some
improved communications at the end of
the day passengers have two things they
want they were on time trains and they
want to know what's going on that's
their to top the climate's all right
Russ I would thank you for coming on to
explain that this morning and that's
depressing isn't it Wellington two years
too short you so short years who is it's
fine are you going to have to put up
with it